From: NAR Genomics and Bioinformatics <onbehalfof@manuscriptcentral.com>
Subject: NAR Genomics and Bioinformatics - Decision on Manuscript ID NARGAB-2019-085
Date: November 17, 2019 at 4:14:39 PM MST
To: rgutenk@email.arizona.edu
Cc: javier.herrero@ucl.ac.uk
Reply-To: cedric.notredame@crg.es

17-Nov-2019

NARGAB-2019-085
BATCAVE: Calling somatic mutations with a tumor- and site-specific prior

Dear Dr. Gutenkunst,

Thank you for giving us the opportunity to consider your manuscript.

The reviewers have raised substantial criticisms, which are detailed below. We will consider publishing your manuscript only if you can accommodate their suggestions into a revised version.

The reviewers' reports are confidential and should not be published without the express permission of the Editors.

To revise your manuscript, log into https://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/nargab and enter your Author Centre, where you will find your manuscript listed under "Manuscripts with Decisions."  Under "Actions," click on "Create a Revision."  Your manuscript number has been appended to denote a revision.

You may also click the below link to start the revision process (or continue the process if you have already started your revision) for your manuscript. If you use the below link you will not be required to login to ScholarOne Manuscripts.

*** PLEASE NOTE: This is a two-step process. After clicking on the link, you will be directed to a webpage to confirm. *** 

https://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/nargab?URL_MASK=05fedfa9186d4cadb07724bfc4ac4ef6

When you submit your revised manuscript, you should provide a concise point-by-point response to the reviewers' comments. In order to expedite the processing of the revised manuscript, please be as specific as possible in your response. Any text in the manuscript that you change or add should be marked in red.

IMPORTANT:  Your original files are available to you when you upload your revised manuscript.  Please delete any redundant files before completing the submission.

Because we are trying to facilitate timely publication of manuscripts submitted to NAR Genomics and Bioinformatics, your revised manuscript should be uploaded as soon as possible.  If it is not possible for you to submit your revision in a reasonable amount of time, we may have to consider your paper as a new submission.

Once again, thank you for submitting your manuscript to NAR Genomics and Bioinformatics and I look forward to receiving your revision.

Sincerely,
Dr. Cedric Notredame
Editor in Chief, NAR Genomics and Bioinformatics
cedric.notredame@crg.es


Reviewer: 1

Comments to the Author
Mannakee and Gutenkunst present BATCAVE, an algorithm that first estimates the tumor’s mutation profile and mutation rate using high-confidence variants and then uses them as a prior when calling other variants based on mutational signatures. The concept behind this work is interesting. However, the difference in accuracy between MuTect and BATCAVE is relatively small except for the case when one has particularly high depth sequencing (500x), limiting the utility of the method. 

Still, the 500x whole exome case does indicate that BATCAVE is better at identifying low frequency variants and thus can better reveal intratumoral heterogeneity, an important area of inquiry in cancer. Interestingly, the AUROC values for both MuTect and BATCAVE have room for improvement for the 500x whole exome case (Table 1). I suggest the authors further investigate how to improve the AUROC values. For example, in equation 4, it is unclear why the authors assume \nu be uniformly distributed. Although this is also an assumption of MuTect, the BATCAVE approach inherently distinguishes mutations by allele frequency – since log-likelihood is closely associated to AF.  Perhaps a model in which \nu follows a decreasing distribution vs. AF (e.g. in concordance with a model of a growing tumor) would yield better AUROC values.  

In Rubanova et al ( https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/260471v4.full), it is argued that there are changes in mutational signatures over time in cancers. While Mannakee and Gutenkunst mention this work, they should further comment on whether such changes in mutational signatures over time are small enough to be explained by the BATCAVER concept of re-evaluating mutations based on p-value.

Minor
p.2: “Folding the central base to the pyrimidines”: The “folding” terminology is not standard and should be improved. 

Equation 11: This equation is not correct if there is subclonal copy number evolution that changes the distribution of mutations above the allele frequency threshold. The authors should more clearly state this assumption.


Reviewer: 2

Comments to the Author
Mannakee et al have developed a tool called BATCAVE for calling mutations from sequencing data. They claim to have used a novel approach of using tumor and site-specific priors for calling mutations. In my opinion authors have done a good job in terms of using a novel approach which harnesses patient/tumor specific information to call mutations. I agree with the authors that this approach was missing in other tools. I accept this study to be published given the authors address few points mentioned below:

1. Does BATCAVE accounts for tumor purity estimates while calling mutations?

2. In case of multi-region sequencing data, used for studying spatial intra-tumor heterogeneity, usually the existing tools estimate very high levels of heterogeneity. I suppose this is because they are being very stringent in terms of calling mutations especially the ones with low vafs. In that case the people end up using other tools like bamreadcount etc. to check status of these mutations in the bam files and re-estimate the extent of heterogeneity. It will be important to see how BATCAVE performs in such datasets.

3. Do the mutation signatures (example smoking signatures in lung cancer or UV signatures in melanoma) still appear in the more stringent BATCAVE set of mutations?

Associate Editor: Herrero, Javier
Comments to the Author:
Thank you for giving us the opportunity to consider your manuscript for NAR Genomics and Bioinformatics.

We have now received the feedback from 2 reviewers which you will find in this email. You will see that they see merit in the new approach you are proposing to improve the calling of somatic mutations. Please refer to their points for the specifics and the comments from our Editor in Chief about the suitability of the manuscript for our journal and the possible next steps.

Stressing on some of the points raised by the reviewers, I would suggest you include more details about the assumption and limitations of BATCAVE. In particular, the possibility of changes of mutational signatures over time can be quite striking in some cases, especially if the original tumour is driven by very specific mutagens like UV light or tobacco smoke. Ideally, the software should try to correct for these cases or at least warn the user about a possible shift in signatures/contexts. Related to this, there is probably a minimum number of high-confidence mutations that are required by BATCAVE to produce reliable results. As with the previous point, ideally the batcaver should address or warn the user if the assumptions are violated. Lastly, as correctly pointed out by the second reviewer, the sequencing coverage only makes sense in the context of the purity of the samples and this information should be provided to the reader.

Sincerely,
Prof. Javier Herrero
Associate Editor, NAR Genomics and Bioinformatics
